README.md, before:

The Cog VM source tree
---------------------
This is the README for the Cog Git source tree:
	https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm

[![Download stable](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-stable-green.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/latest)
[![Download latestBuild](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-latest%20build-blue.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/tag/latest-build)
[![Download latestAssertBuild](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-latest%20assert%20build-lightgrey.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/tag/latest-assert-build)
[![Download latestDebugBuild](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-latest%20debug%20build-lightgrey.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/tag/latest-debug-build)

[![Build for macOS](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/macos.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/macos.yml)
[![Build for Windows](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/win.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/win.yml)
[![Build for Linux (x86)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux.yml)
[![Build for Linux (ARM)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux-arm.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux-arm.yml)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/59481716.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/59481716)


Builds are tested automatically on each commit, for Windows, macOS, and Linux.
Windows and Linux also have 32-bit targets. Squeak and Pharo VMs are built with 
and without JIT, with and without Spur, and with and without Sista, as available
per platform. All build artifacts remain accessible for 90 days for each
workflow run; the latest artifacts are uploaded to a dedicated release tag
(e.g., "latest-build"), overwritten with each successful run. If you wish to
commit *without* triggering a build, for example if you were to only edit this 
documentation, then if you add **[ci skip]** somewhere in your commit message, 
no workflow run will be started for that commit.

### Important notice for Developers:
We rely on source file substitutions in the src tree, specifically,
any sq*SCCSVersion.h files anywhere in the tree are processed to replace
`$Rev$`, `$Date$`, and `$URL$` with the current revision (defined as the
timestamp %Y%m%d%H%M of the latest commit), the human readable date of that
commit, and the url of the origin repository these sources were cloned from.

The first time you clone this repository, you *must* therefore run this command:
```bash
./scripts/updateSCCSVersions
```
This will install filters, post-commit, and post-merge hooks to update the
sq*SCCSVersion.h files anytime you commit or merge.

For easier use, we include the scripts/gitci and scripts/gitciplugins scripts to
commit changes to this branch and changes to the Cross and win32 plugins (which
are shared with the old Squeak interpreter trunk). If you decide not to use
these scripts for checking in sources, you should also run the
`updateSCCSVersions` script anytime you decide to use `git-reset` or
`git-checkout` to make sure the stamps are updated correctly. Failing to do so
will result in incorrect version stamps in your compiled VMs.

Overview
--------
First, opensmalltalk-vm (a.k.a. the Cog VM) is the virtual machine beneath the
Cuis, Pharo and Squeak Smalltalk dialects.  For issues related to these systems
that are unrelated to the VM itself, please use their forums:
* http://www.cuis-smalltalk.org
* http://pharo.org/community
* http://squeak.org/community/

Second, the core VM, which comprises the execution engine and garbage collector,
and the core plugins, is developed in Smalltalk, using the *VM Simulator*.  This
repository contains the code generated by the Simulator, and the platform support
code for the entire VM, its CI infrastructure and so on.  The core VM **should
not** be developed by editing the generated code.  The core VM should be
developed using Smalltalk.  The source code repository for the VM is  
http://source.squeak.org/VMMaker.html.  
You can find scripts to build a Smalltalk image in which to do core VM development
in the [image](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/tree/Cog/image)
directory in this repository.  You can read about the Simulator here:
* https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328509577_Two_Decades_of_Smalltalk_VM_Development_Live_VM_Development_through_Simulation_Tools
* https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01883380/document
Please look at the wiki on this site for a description of on-going projects.

Cog is an evolution of the Squeak Back-to-the-future Smalltalk virtual machine
that provides a number of different Smalltalk virtual machines.  The VMs are
developed in Smalltalk, using all the dynamic and reflective facilities of the
Squeak/Pharo Smalltalk system.  As such, developing in Cog is a delight.  The
Smalltalk framework comprising the various Cog VMs is translated into C by its
Slang component to produce VM source that is combined with platform-specific
support sources and compiled via a C compiler to obtain a fast production VM.
This directory tree includes the output of Slang for various configurations of
"Cog VM" and the associated platform support code, plus build directories that
can be used to produce production VMs.

This directory tree also includes an instance of the Smalltalk Cog development
system, suitable for developing the VM in Smalltalk, and for generating new
VM sources.

The "Cog VM" comes in a bewildering variety of forms.  The first distinction
is between Stack, Cog and Sista VMs.  Stack VMs are those with context-to-stack
mapping that optimise message sending by keeping method activations on a stack
instead of in contexts.  These are pure interpreters but are significantly
faster than the standard context-based Interpreter VM.  Cog VMs add a JIT to
the mix, compiling methods used more than once to machine code on the fly.
Sista VMs, as yet unrealised and in development, add support for adaptive
optimization that does speculative inlining at the bytecode-to-bytecode level.

Another distinction is between "v3" VMs and Spur VMs.  "v3" is the original
object representation for Squeak as described in the back-to-the-future paper.
Spur, as described on the www.mirandabanda.org blog, is a faster object
representation which uses generation scavenging, lazy forwarding for fast
become, a single object header format common to 32 and 64 bit versions, and a
segmented heap that can grow and shrink, releasing memory back to the host OS.
Squeak 5.0, Cuis 5 and Pharo 5 and subsequent releases use Spur.

Another distinction is between normal single-threaded VMs that schedule "green"
Smalltalk light-weight processes above a single-threaded VM, and multi-threaded
VMs that share the VM between any number of native threads such that only one
native thread owns the VM at any one time, switching between threads on FFI
calls and callbacks or on Smalltalk process switches when Smalltalk processes
are owned by threads.  This architecture offers non-blocking FFI calls and
interoperability with multiple native threads, but does /not/ provide true
concurrency.  This multi-threaded support is as yet experimental.

Eliot Miranda
April 2021

Learning about the VM
---------------------
As the codebase of the VM is split between this repository and the Slang sources that live in the image, finding the right entry points to get started can be difficult.

Luckily, this repository contains some high-level documentation in the `docs/src` folder to help you get started.

The easiest way to read this documentation is to install [mdbook](https://rust-lang.github.io/mdBook/) and run `mdbook serve --open` from the `docs/src` folder.

Leon Matthes
July 2022

Commit message:

Link to github pages
[skip ci]

README.md, after:

The Cog VM source tree
---------------------
This is the README for the Cog Git source tree:
	https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm

[![Download stable](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-stable-green.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/latest)
[![Download latestBuild](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-latest%20build-blue.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/tag/latest-build)
[![Download latestAssertBuild](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-latest%20assert%20build-lightgrey.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/tag/latest-assert-build)
[![Download latestDebugBuild](https://img.shields.io/badge/download-latest%20debug%20build-lightgrey.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/releases/tag/latest-debug-build)

[![Build for macOS](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/macos.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/macos.yml)
[![Build for Windows](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/win.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/win.yml)
[![Build for Linux (x86)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux.yml)
[![Build for Linux (ARM)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux-arm.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/actions/workflows/linux-arm.yml)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/59481716.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/59481716)


Builds are tested automatically on each commit, for Windows, macOS, and Linux.
Windows and Linux also have 32-bit targets. Squeak and Pharo VMs are built with 
and without JIT, with and without Spur, and with and without Sista, as available
per platform. All build artifacts remain accessible for 90 days for each
workflow run; the latest artifacts are uploaded to a dedicated release tag
(e.g., "latest-build"), overwritten with each successful run. If you wish to
commit *without* triggering a build, for example if you were to only edit this 
documentation, then if you add **[ci skip]** somewhere in your commit message, 
no workflow run will be started for that commit.

### Important notice for Developers:
We rely on source file substitutions in the src tree, specifically,
any sq*SCCSVersion.h files anywhere in the tree are processed to replace
`$Rev$`, `$Date$`, and `$URL$` with the current revision (defined as the
timestamp %Y%m%d%H%M of the latest commit), the human readable date of that
commit, and the url of the origin repository these sources were cloned from.

The first time you clone this repository, you *must* therefore run this command:
```bash
./scripts/updateSCCSVersions
```
This will install filters, post-commit, and post-merge hooks to update the
sq*SCCSVersion.h files anytime you commit or merge.

For easier use, we include the scripts/gitci and scripts/gitciplugins scripts to
commit changes to this branch and changes to the Cross and win32 plugins (which
are shared with the old Squeak interpreter trunk). If you decide not to use
these scripts for checking in sources, you should also run the
`updateSCCSVersions` script anytime you decide to use `git-reset` or
`git-checkout` to make sure the stamps are updated correctly. Failing to do so
will result in incorrect version stamps in your compiled VMs.

Overview
--------
First, opensmalltalk-vm (a.k.a. the Cog VM) is the virtual machine beneath the
Cuis, Pharo and Squeak Smalltalk dialects.  For issues related to these systems
that are unrelated to the VM itself, please use their forums:
* http://www.cuis-smalltalk.org
* http://pharo.org/community
* http://squeak.org/community/

Second, the core VM, which comprises the execution engine and garbage collector,
and the core plugins, is developed in Smalltalk, using the *VM Simulator*.  This
repository contains the code generated by the Simulator, and the platform support
code for the entire VM, its CI infrastructure and so on.  The core VM **should
not** be developed by editing the generated code.  The core VM should be
developed using Smalltalk.  The source code repository for the VM is  
http://source.squeak.org/VMMaker.html.  
You can find scripts to build a Smalltalk image in which to do core VM development
in the [image](https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/tree/Cog/image)
directory in this repository.  You can read about the Simulator here:
* https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328509577_Two_Decades_of_Smalltalk_VM_Development_Live_VM_Development_through_Simulation_Tools
* https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01883380/document
Please look at the wiki on this site for a description of on-going projects.

Cog is an evolution of the Squeak Back-to-the-future Smalltalk virtual machine
that provides a number of different Smalltalk virtual machines.  The VMs are
developed in Smalltalk, using all the dynamic and reflective facilities of the
Squeak/Pharo Smalltalk system.  As such, developing in Cog is a delight.  The
Smalltalk framework comprising the various Cog VMs is translated into C by its
Slang component to produce VM source that is combined with platform-specific
support sources and compiled via a C compiler to obtain a fast production VM.
This directory tree includes the output of Slang for various configurations of
"Cog VM" and the associated platform support code, plus build directories that
can be used to produce production VMs.

This directory tree also includes an instance of the Smalltalk Cog development
system, suitable for developing the VM in Smalltalk, and for generating new
VM sources.

The "Cog VM" comes in a bewildering variety of forms.  The first distinction
is between Stack, Cog and Sista VMs.  Stack VMs are those with context-to-stack
mapping that optimise message sending by keeping method activations on a stack
instead of in contexts.  These are pure interpreters but are significantly
faster than the standard context-based Interpreter VM.  Cog VMs add a JIT to
the mix, compiling methods used more than once to machine code on the fly.
Sista VMs, as yet unrealised and in development, add support for adaptive
optimization that does speculative inlining at the bytecode-to-bytecode level.

Another distinction is between "v3" VMs and Spur VMs.  "v3" is the original
object representation for Squeak as described in the back-to-the-future paper.
Spur, as described on the www.mirandabanda.org blog, is a faster object
representation which uses generation scavenging, lazy forwarding for fast
become, a single object header format common to 32 and 64 bit versions, and a
segmented heap that can grow and shrink, releasing memory back to the host OS.
Squeak 5.0, Cuis 5 and Pharo 5 and subsequent releases use Spur.

Another distinction is between normal single-threaded VMs that schedule "green"
Smalltalk light-weight processes above a single-threaded VM, and multi-threaded
VMs that share the VM between any number of native threads such that only one
native thread owns the VM at any one time, switching between threads on FFI
calls and callbacks or on Smalltalk process switches when Smalltalk processes
are owned by threads.  This architecture offers non-blocking FFI calls and
interoperability with multiple native threads, but does /not/ provide true
concurrency.  This multi-threaded support is as yet experimental.

Eliot Miranda
April 2021

Learning about the VM
---------------------
As the codebase of the VM is split between this repository and the Slang sources that live in the image, finding the right entry points to get started can be difficult.

Luckily, this repository contains some high-level documentation in the `docs/src` folder to help you get started.

The easiest way to read this documentation is to [visit our GH pages](https://leonmatthes.github.io/opensmalltalk-vm/). <!-- TODO: Update links to main github pages -->
If you want, you can also read the documentation from within Squeak.
For this, follow the guide on [Creating your own VMMaker image](https://leonmatthes.github.io/opensmalltalk-vm/vmmaker-image-creation.html).<!-- TODO: Update links to main github pages -->

Alternatively you can install [mdbook](https://rust-lang.github.io/mdBook/) and run `mdbook serve --open` from the `docs/src` folder.


Leon Matthes
July 2022
